1. Write out a generic SELECT statement.

SELECT title, author
FROM books
WHERE title LIKE '%Harry Potterw%';

2. Create a fun way to remember the order of operations in a SELECT statement, such as a mnemonic.

Search For What -> SELECT FROM WHERE

3. Given this dogs table, write queries to select the following pieces of data:
Display the name, gender, and age of all dogs that are part Labrador.

SELECT name, gender, age
FROM dogs
WHERE breed LIKE '%labrador%';

Display the ids of all dogs that are under 1 year old.

SELECT id
FROM dogs
WHERE age < 1;

Display the name and age of all dogs that are female and over 35lbs.

SELECT name, age
FROM dogs
WHERE gender = 'F' AND weight > 35;


Display all of the information about all dogs that are not Shepherd mixes.

SELECT *
FROM dogs
WHERE breed NOT LIKE '%shepherd%';

Display the id, age, weight, and breed of all dogs that are either over 60lbs or Great Danes.

SELECT id, age, weight, breed
FROM dogs
WHERE weight > 60 OR breed = 'great dane';

4. Given this cats table, what records are returned from these queries?

SELECT name, adoption_date FROM cats;

name	adoption_date
Mushi	2016-03-22
Seashell	(null)
Azul	2016-04-17
Victoire	2016-09-01
Nala	(null)


SELECT name, age FROM cats;

name	age
Mushi	1
Seashell	7
Azul	3
Victoire	7
Nala	1

5. From the cats table, write queries to select the following pieces of data.

Display all the information about all of the available cats.

SELECT *
FROM cats
WHERE adoption_date IS NULL;


Display the name and sex of all cats who are 7 years old.

SELECT name, gender
FROM cats
WHERE age = 7;


Find all of the names of the cats, so you don’t choose duplicate names for new cats.

SELECT name
FROM cats;

6. List each comparison operator and explain, in your own words, when you would use it. Include a real world example for each.
If you can’t list these from memory, do these flashcards until you can!

> greater than: If you have a list of cars you can use this operator to determine which cars need an oil change based on the last time they had an oil change.
>= greater than or equal to:  If you have a party with a list of guests and their age, you can use this operator to determine how many are legal to drink and determine how much alcohol and other beverages to provide.
< less than: If you want to issue a cold alert for cities that have temperatures below a certain degree, you can use this operator.
<= less than or equal to: You have a list of places you want to visit for a day trip. Since it is only a day trip, you only want to visit places within a certain radius. You can use this operator to narrow down the list of places to visit for your trip.
= equal to You have a list of music performances next week and want to look for those that are in the city of San Francisco. You can use this operator to narrow your search.
!= not equal to: You are debating what to have for lunch. You can use the not equal to operator to filter out the cuisines you don't want to have.

7. From the cats table, what data is returned from these queries?

SELECT name FROM cats WHERE gender = 'F';

name
Seashell
Nala


SELECT name FROM cats WHERE age <> 3;

name
Mushi
Seashell
Victoire
Nala


SELECT id FROM cats WHERE name != 'Mushi' AND gender = 'M';

id
3
4
